This document contains the descriptions of all modules completed according to the
2025 EMS yearbook of Stellenbosch University.

Academic Year 2021
Business Management 113 — 12 credits (Code: 48550-113)
Procedures for the establishment of a new business, the business environment, business
ethics, competition, idea generation and entrepreneurship, choice of form of business,
determining break-even levels, resources and people involved in the business, management
and managerial resources.
Home department: Business Management
Economics 144 — 12 credits (Code: 12084-144)
The module will introduce you to economic application and policy, with a strong focus on
South Africa, by exploring contemporary economic issues: inflation, unemployment, economic
growth, external stability and a fair distribution of income. The aggregate economy in the
short-run and long-run: measuring the aggregate economy, the multiplier model,
unemployment and fiscal policy, inflation and monetary policy, the money market and the
South African Reserve Bank (SARB), technological change and income inequality.
Globalisation: international trade, migration and investment.
Corequisite module: Economics 114
Home department: Economics
Mercantile law (acc) 193 — 24 credits (Code: 58432-193)
Sources of South African Law and fundamental concepts; general principles of contract law,
agency, specific contracts (sale, lease and credit agreements); labour law; insolvency law
and security; instruments of payment.
Home department: Mercantile Law
Information systems 144 — 12 credits (Code: 48062-144)
Practical use of general spreadsheet software in a business environment.
Notes: • Information Systems 144 and Information Systems 112 may not be presented
together for degree purposes.

Business Management 142 — 6 credits (Code: 48550-142)
The investment cycle; the role and functioning of the JSE Securities Exchange SA;
investment risks; factors that influence share prices; fundamental and technical analysis of
companies.
Home department: Business Management
Statistics and Data Science 188 — 18 credits (Code: 14223-188)
Linear programming: graphical techniques to solve problems with two variables; shadow
prices; sensitivity analyses. (Only applies to BAcc students).
Data science: fundamental concepts; the data cycle; data ethics.
Descriptive statistics: various data types; graphical representation of data; descriptive
measures of location, spread and association; box plots.
Sampling techniques: simple random; stratified; systematic; cluster; probability
proportional to size.
Probability theory: basic probability concepts; Bayes’ theorem; counting rules.
Discrete random variables and probability distributions: expected value, variance and
standard deviation of a discrete random variable; covariance between discrete random
variables; binomial, hypergeometric and Poisson distributions.
Continuous random variables and probability distributions: expected value, variance and
standard deviation of a continuous random variable; the uniform, normal and exponential
distributions.
Sampling distributions: central limit theorem; sampling distributions of the mean and a
proportion; sampling distribution of the difference between two means and two
proportions.
Inferential statistics: interval estimation and hypothesis testing for the mean, a proportion,
the variance and the standard deviation; interval estimation and hypothesis testing for the
difference between two means, two proportions and the ratio of two variances.
Regression analysis: the simple and multiple linear regression model; the method of least
squares estimation; inference on the model parameters and coefficient of correlation;
residual analysis.
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science
Note: To major in Statistics for a BCom degree, the modules Statistics and Data Science 188,
Statistics 214, 224, 244 and Statistics 318, 348 are required.

Theory of interest 152 — 6 credits (Code: 38784-152)
Simple and compound interest. Force of interest. Future value, present value and discount.
Accumulation and discounting of amounts of money. Various types of annuities and
applications. Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science
Economics 114 — 12 credits (Code: 12084-114)
Problems economists address: inequality, poverty, economic growth, sustainability,
scarcity, choice. Economic decision-making: incentives, relative prices, economic rent,
labour, production, opportunity cost. Economic relationships and interactions: game theory,
equity, efficiency. Markets: demand and supply, price-taking and competitive markets,
elasticity, labour market. Market dynamics: rent-seeking, market failure, externalities and
government policies. Home department: Economics
Information systems 114 — 12 credits (Code: 48062-114)
General information technology concepts for business systems (general systems theory;
infrastructure; networks and electronic communication; introduction to the development,
management and control of information systems). The practical use of a computerised
accounting information system and general application software.
Home department: School of Accountancy

Academic Year 2022
Financial management 214 — 16 credits (Code: §1047-214)
Compiling the statement of financial position, the statement of profit or loss and the
statement of cash flows; the measurement and evaluation of financial performance with
reference to profitability, liquidity and solvency analysis; case studies about financial
analysis; introduction to the investment decision; the financing decision; sources of finance;
the dividend decision; financial planning and the management of working capital with
specific reference to cash, trade receivables and inventory control; financial failures;
international financial management.
Corequisite modules: • Business Management 113 • Business Management 142 or
Mathematics 114 or Mathematics (Bio) 124
Home department: Business Management

Economics 214 — 16 credits (Code: 12084-214)
Macroeconomics: business cycle measurement, consumer and firm behaviour, closed one-
period macroeconomic models, consumption and savings decisions in a two-period model
Microeconomics: goods and factor markets, demand theory, production and cost theory,
market structures and the theory of the firm, welfare theory.
Prerequisite pass modules: Economics 114, 144
Home department: Economics
Statistics (Applied Statistics) 214 — 16 credits (Code: 19658-214)
Descriptive statistics: Various data types; Frequency distributions; Contingency tables;
Graphical representation of different data types; Measures of location and spread; Box-and-
whisker plot. Discrete stochastic variables and probability distributions: Expected value,
variance and standard deviation of a discrete stochastic variable; Correlation between
discrete stochastic variables; Joint, marginal and conditional distributions; Distribution of the
sum of variables; Binomial and Poisson distributions. Continuous stochastic variables and
probability distributions: Expected value, variance and standard deviation of a continuous
stochastic variable. Distributions: Uniform, normal, exponential, gamma, t, F, chi square and
beta. Sampling distributions: The central limit theorem; Sampling distributions of one mean;
One proportion and one variance; Sampling distributions of the difference between two means
and the difference between two proportions; Sampling distributions of the ratio of two
variances. Inferential statistics: Interval estimation and hypothesis testing for one mean, one
proportion and one variance; Interval estimation and hypothesis testing for the difference
between two means, the difference between two proportions and the ratio of two variances;
Concept and calculation of p values in above cases; Determining sample sizes; Calculation of
power and the effect of sample size on it. Categorical data analysis: Hypothesis testing for the
difference between two or more proportions; Tests for independence; The goodness of fit test.
Note: Application of statistical techniques using Microsoft® Excel is emphasised throughout.
Prerequisite pass modules: • Statistics and Data Science 188 or • Probability Theory and
Statistics 114 or 144 Corequisite module: Statistics 224 (Students who have passed
Mathematics 114 or 144 are exempt from this.)
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science
Statistics (Statistical Theory and Practice) 224 — 16 credits (Code: 19658-224)
Handling data sets: Data vectors and data matrices; different types of data and its influence
on the choice of applicable statistical techniques; manipulations with data vectors and data
matrices; calculating simple statistical measures with the use of vectors and matrices; the R
programming language; importing data into R; vector and matrix operations in R to
calculate statistical measures; determinant and eigenvalues of a square matrix with
applications in statistics.

Moment generating functions and their applications: Moments of a random variable;
calculation and interpretation of discrete and continuous moments with summation and
integration; the exponential function and some of its basic properties; the moment
generating function; moment generating functions of important distributions; obtaining
moments from moment generating functions using differentiation and a series expansion;
graphical displays of probability distributions in R (the denstrip package).
Transformations: The logarithmic and square root transformations and their usage and
effect in the analysis of data.
Optimisation in statistics: Obtaining the maximum and minimum of a function of a single
variable using differentiation; the least squares method; the maximum likelihood method
(in general); Lagrange multipliers.
Transformations: The logarithmic and square root transformations and their usage and
effect in the analysis of data. Prerequisite pass module: Statistics and Data Science 188
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science
Financial accounting 188 — 24 credits (Code: 26883-188)
Theoretical principles of International Financial Reporting Standards; accounting systems;
preparation and presentation of financial statements for different enterprises.
Home department: School of Accountancy
Investment management 254 — 16 credits (Code: 55344-254)
Portfolio theory and portfolio management; the relationship between risk and return; the
efficient market hypothesis; valuation and risk of fixed income securities; evaluation of
share investments; properties of derivative instruments; derivative strategies; valuation of
options and futures; measurement and evaluation of portfolio returns.
Corequisite module: Business Management 113 Prerequisite modules: • Business
Management 142 • Statistics and Data Science 188 or • Probability Theory and Statistics
114 or 144
Home department: Business Management
Economics 244 — 16 credits (Code: 12084-244)
South African monetary policy. International trade and finance: the theory of international
trade, barriers to free trade, the World Trade Organisation and regional economic
integration, the balance of payments, international financial markets, adjustment
mechanisms, policy options, exchange rate determination, the international monetary
system and South African exchange rate policy.
Prerequisite pass modules: Economics 114, 144 Corequisite module: Economics 214

Home department: Economics
Statistical Inference 244 — 16 credits (Code: 19658-244)
Sampling techniques: Simple random sampling; Stratified sampling; Systematic sampling;
Cluster sampling; Probability proportional to size sampling.
Properties of estimators: Unbiasedness; Efficiency; Consistency; Sufficiency; Robustness.
Estimation methods: Maximum likelihood; Method of moments.
Simple linear regression analysis: The simple linear regression model; Method of least
squares estimation; Inference on the model parameters and the correlation coefficient;
Residual analysis; Prediction intervals and confidence intervals.
Multiple linear regression analysis: The multiple linear regression model; Residual analysis;
Inference on the parameters of the model; Regression models with dummy variables and
interaction terms; Polynomial regression; Transformations; Collinearity; Variable selection.
Analysis of variance: Completely randomised factorial designs; Block designs.
Non-parametric techniques for analysis of variance: Wilcoxon’s rank sum test; The sign test;
Wilcoxon’s signed-rank test; Kruskal-Wallis test; Friedman’s test.
Note: Application of statistical techniques using Microsoft® Excel and R are emphasised
throughout. Prerequisite pass module: Statistics 214 Prerequisite module: Statistics 224
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science

Academic Year 2023
Investment management 314 — 12 credits
Theory of valuation; valuation models and techniques; practical implementation of
valuation models; valuation variables; stock market analysis; industry analysis; company
analysis and stock selection; technical analysis; equity portfolio management strategies.
Prerequisite module: Investment Management 254
Prerequisite pass modules: • Statistics and Data Science 188 or • Probability Theory and
Statistics 114 or 144
Home department: Business Management

Investment management 324 — 12 credits
Features and overview of fixed income securities and sectors; yield measures and spreads;
valuations; interest rate risks and returns; credit analysis; term structure and interest rate
dynamics; and other selected securities.
Prerequisite module: Investment Management 254
Prerequisite pass modules: • Statistics and Data Science 188 or • Probability Theory and
Statistics 114 or 144
Home department: Business Management
Financial management 314 — 12 credits
Standardisation of published financial statements; reclassifying items from financial
statements for managerial decisionmaking; application of financial planning process by
means of financial forecasting; calculation of the sustainable growth rate; estimation of an
optimal capital structure; the application of free cash flow valuations; the influence of
inflation on annual financial statements.
Corequisite modules: • Financial Management 214 • Financial Management 244 or
Investment Management 254
Home department: Business Management
Financial management 332 — 12 credits
The application of the following financial selection measures on large capital projects:
payback period method, method of the equivalent uniform annual cost, net present value
method and the internal rate of return method; the impact of inflation when assessing
investment projects and the calculation of the cost of capital; priority determination for
multiple mutually exclusive projects.
Corequisite modules: • Financial Management 214 • Financial Management 244 or
Investment Management 254
Home department: Business Management
Statistics (Linear and Econometric Models) 318 — 24 credits
Regression analysis: The multiple linear regression model. Maximum likelihood estimators;
Residual analysis; Outliers and influential observations; Unequal variances;
Multicollinearity; Power transformations; Variable selection; Weighted least squares;
Logistic regression; Ridge regression; Robust regression; Principal component regression;
Dummy variables and ANOVA; Log-linear model; Econometric models.

Multivariate methods: Presentation of multivariate data; The multivariate normal
distribution; Tests for normality; Hypothesis testing for one and two population mean
vectors; Confidence regions and simultaneous confidence intervals; Multivariate control
charts; Multivariate analysis of variance; Linear discriminant analysis; The use of the
software R, STATISTICA and SAS to apply regression analysis and multivariate methods to
datasets.
Prerequisite pass modules: • Statistics 214, 224, 244 or • Mathematical Statistics 214, 245,
246
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science
Investment management 344 — 12 credits
Exposure to and handling of financial risk; the risk management process; the hedging
concept; the functions of the treasury and the management of negotiable value;
characteristics of derived financial instruments; strategies for the use of derived financial
instruments; valuation of options and futures contracts; basic arbitrage strategies with
options and futures contracts; swaps and forward rate agreements; alternative investments.
Prerequisite module: Investment Management 254
Prerequisite pass modules: • Statistics and Data Science 188 or • Probability Theory and
Statistics 114 or 144
Home department: Business Management
Investment management 348 — 12 credits
Introduction to the nature and scope of real estate; real estate markets and trends; legal
aspects; financial and investment analysis in respect of the acquisition, ownership and sale
of real estate; the role and impact of capital gains tax; market valuation approaches; types of
real estate investment and financing instruments in the real estate market.
Corequisite modules: • Financial Management 214 or • Financial Accounting 178 or 188
Prerequisite pass modules: • Statistics and Data Science 188 or • Probability Theory and
Statistics 114 or 144
Home department: Business Management

Investment management 354 — 12 credits
The basic construction and ethical management of investment portfolios containing local
and international investable asset classes. Investment ethics introduce the Code of Ethics
and Standards of Professional Conduct of the CFA Institute; liability of investment
practitioners towards the profession, employers, clients, possible clients and the broad
public; reporting of historical investment returns; responsible risk taking; risk control.
Portfolio management contains the functioning of investment markets; investment indexes;
risk and return of real portfolios; advantages and disadvantages of diversification;
transaction costs; investment analysis of portfolios investing in developed and emerging
markets; and how to understand investors’ behavioural patterns.
Corequisite module: Investment Management 254 Prerequisite pass modules: • Statistics
and Data Science 188 or • Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or 144
Home department: Business Management
Financial accounting 288 — 32 credits
Continuation of International Financial Reporting Standards; introduction to group
statements and treatment of intergroup transactions.
Prerequisite pass modules: Financial Accounting 178 or 188
Home department: School of Accountancy
Statistics (Statistical Practice) 348 — 24 credits
Probability theory: Discrete probability distributions (the binomial, geometric, negative
binomial, hypergeometric and Poisson distributions); Moments and moment generating
functions; Continuous probability distributions (the normal, gamma and beta distributions);
Functions of random variables (the method of transformations, the method of moment
generating functions, and order statistics).
Advanced statistical inference: Properties of estimators (unbiasedness, efficiency,
consistency, sufficiency, robustness); Method-of-moments estimation; Maximum likelihood
estimation; Likelihood ratio tests.
Time series analysis: Time series decomposition methods; Single exponential smoothing;
Holt’s method; Holt-Winter’s method; Multiple regression in time series analysis; Box-
Jenkins methodology for ARIMA models; Using the R and STATISTICA software to apply
time series models.
Stochastic simulation: Generating random numbers from different distributions using R;
Inverse transform method; Acceptance-rejection method; Practical applications of
simulation using R.

Bayesian inference: Bayes’ theorem; Bayesian priors, posteriors and estimators; Bayesian
credibility intervals; Bayes hypothesis testing.
Prerequisite module: Statistics 318 Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science

Academic Year 2024
Biostatistics 712 — 12 credits (Code: 10408-712)
Objectives and content: Biostatistics may be regarded as the study of the application of
statistics to medicine. It covers medical terminology, the design of clinical trials, the
collection and numerical analysis of data, the interpretation of the analyses and the drawing
of conclusions. Particular emphasis is given to skills relevant to medical literature (the
writing, as well as the understanding of writing by others) and statistical techniques and
software that are widely used when doing medical research. It is not a mathematically
strenuous course. It deals primarily with the philosophy and terminology of medical
research, as well as the statistical techniques problems encountered in the medical field in
particular. Topics that will be covered are: SAS, Clinical trials, Power and sample size
analysis, Longitudinal data analysis, Handling missing data and Statistical genetics.
Multivariate Methods in Statistics 721 (A) — 12 credits (Code: 10600-721)
Objectives and content: The objective of the course is to teach students the practical
application of multivariate analysis. Various multivariate methods are dealt with. Students
learn when and where to apply these techniques. The consequences of the assumptions
made on some of these techniques are also studied. The following topics are studied: Matrix
algebra, Characterising and displaying multivariate data, The multivariate normal
distribution, Inferences on one or two mean vectors, Multivariate analysis of variance,
Inferences on the covariance matrix, Discriminant analysis, Classification analysis,
Multivariate regression, Canonical correlation, Principal component analysis, Factor
analysis and Cluster analysis. The R and SAS software are used in all the applications to
datasets. The MMS A module is a prerequisite for the MMS B module.
Multivariate Methods in Statistics 751 (B) — 12 credits (Code: 10601-751)
Objectives and content: The objective of the course is to teach students the practical
application of multivariate analysis. Various multivariate methods are dealt with. Students
learn when and where to apply these techniques. The consequences of the assumptions
made on some of these techniques are also studied. The following topics are studied: Matrix
algebra, Characterising and displaying multivariate data, The multivariate normal
distribution, Inferences on one or two mean vectors, Multivariate analysis of variance,
Inferences on the covariance matrix, Discriminant analysis, Classification analysis,
Multivariate regression, Canonical correlation, Principal component analysis, Factor
analysis and Cluster analysis. The R and SAS software are used in all the applications to
datasets. The MMS A module is a prerequisite for the MMS B module.

Applied Time-Series Analysis 722 — 12 credits (Code: 10748-722)
Objectives and content: This module is a continuation of undergraduate time series
analyses and concentrates on more advanced forecasting techniques. Topics that are
covered include:
 The Box &amp; Jenkins methodology of tentative model identification, conditional and
unconditional parameter estimation and diagnostic methods for checking the fit of
the series.
 ARIMA and Seasonal ARIMA-processes.
 Introduction to Fourier Analysis, spectrum of a periodic time series, estimation of
the spectrum, periodogram analysis, smoothing of the spectrum.
 Case studies using STATISTICA, R and SAS.
 Forecasting with ARMA models and prediction intervals for forecasts.
 Transfer function models and intervention analysis.
 Multiple regression with ARMA errors, cointegration of non-stationary time series.
 Conditional heteroscedastic time series models, ARCH and GARCH.
Research Assignment: Statistics 792 — 30 credits (Code: 11226-792)
Honours thesis completed with the degree. A comparative study on Principal Component
Analysis and t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embedding. The study involved application
of these clustering techniques to different types of data sets and we performed a critical
analysis on its efficiency in different circumstances.
Capita Selecta in Statistics A 725 — 12 credits (Code: 11920-725) (316 (16) Data
Science (4L, 2P))
Objectives and content: Selected and specialised topics to be followed in Applied Statistics.
Content varies from year to year when offered.
In this module approaches to supervised and unsupervised machine learning are discussed.
Supervised learning uses labelled datasets and can be separated into two types of problems,
namely classification and regression. Classification problems can be solved by a
multivariate technique, namely discriminant analysis that separates two or more groups of
observations based on variables measured on each sample unit. The naïve Bayes classifier is
another effective classification algorithm for discriminating between two or more groups.
To measure the classification accuracy of these techniques, cross validation and bootstrap
resampling procedures are also discussed. In regression problems the relationship between
dependent and independent variables is investigated. Popular regression algorithms are
regularized regression, principal component regression and partial least squares
regression. For classification and regression problems, tree-based methods, such as random

forests and boosting, can also be applied as modelling techniques. Unsupervised learning
uses unlabelled datasets and is associated with tasks in clustering and dimensionality
reduction. Clustering is done according to a similarity measure for grouping data objects
together. Modern clustering techniques such as k-means, Gaussian mixture models and
spectral clustering are discussed. Dimensionality reduction is the statistical technique of
reducing the number of random variables in a problem by obtaining a set of principal
variables. Specifically, principal component analysis and independent component analysis
are discussed.
Prerequisite pass module: Data Science 241
Corequisite module: Mathematical Statistics 312
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science
Introduction to R Programming 723 — 6 credits (Code: 13074-723)
Objectives and content: This module is an introduction to programming and data analysis
within the R open source environment. It is presented as a block course in the first two
weeks of the first semester and commences the week preceding general commencement of
classes. The viewpoint of this module as well as of all modules where R plays a role is in
agreement with the aim of the R computer language: &quot;R has a simple goal: To turn ideas into
software, quickly and faithfully&quot;.
Stochastic Modelling 736 — 12 credits (Code: 65242-736)
Stochastic Modeling is a second-semester module. The module focuses on the study of
probability models and stochastic processes, including both analytical techniques
and stochastic simulation. It aims to equip students with the ability to model real-world
phenomena with random or stochastic components, understand the role of assumptions in
model selection, and apply statistical techniques for analysis and simulation. Various
discrete and continuous distributions were studied in depth. (No formal definition is
publicly available.)
Applied Stochastic Simulation 746 — 12 credits (Code: 65269-746)
Objectives and content: In this module the student learns to understand and apply the
underlying mathematical principles behind stochastic simulation. Statistical theory is
applied to practical problems which are modelled on computer. To achieve this, the student
revises probability theory, including conditional probability and independence, discrete and
continuous distributions, probability integral transformation, and Bayes&#39; theorem.
Pseudorandom number generation is studied to simulate stochastic problems. These
pseudorandom numbers are used to evaluate integrals, and to generate discrete and
continuous random variables. It is also important to do a statistical analysis of simulated
data using point and interval estimates of the mean and variance, as well as bootstrap
techniques. Input data for simulation models are analysed with the chi-squared and

Kolmogorov-Smirnoff goodness-of-fit tests. The student finally develops practical
simulation models of discrete-event, dynamic stochastic processes using a dedicated
simulation software package.